Ethical Considerations for Open Source Governance Models (#2377)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/ethical-research/ethics-open-source-governance.md

(er-ethics-open-source-governance)=
# Ethical Considerations when Choosing an Open Source Governance Model

(er-ethics-open-source-governance-summary)=
## Summary

> Open source projects are rooted in ethical principles. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open source projects should be rooted in ethical principles. 
```

Sharing the code so that anyone can use it, welcoming contributors and creating communities around specific projects are the core of open source. 

> But open source communities also have the responsibility to ensure they are a safe, inclusive environment, understand who might be affected by their projects or check that their tools are not being misused. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But open source communities also have the responsibility to ensure they build a safe and inclusive environment, understand who might be affected by their projects or check that their tools are not being misused. 
```

> Therefore, Open Source Governance Models should embed those ethical considerations within their structure, but the framework to do so is far from well-established. 

Reviewer: Maybe define what Open Source Governance models means here - and/or provide reference.

This chapter discusses some of the key points to take into consideration when designing and implementing ethical guidelines in governance models.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```{note}
**What does ethics in governance mean?**

*Ethical behaviour in governance is defined as the way in which stakeholders try to manage collective action from the perspective, and in the interest, of the majority, thus avoiding damaging behaviours, and through a better control of the power and responsibilities of the leaders. In the area of governance, therefore, ethics aims at raising awareness of the others' rights and common needs, by imposing some principles of minimum requirement. 
Source: Dessain, V., Meier, O., & Salas, V. (2011). Corporate Governance and Ethics: [Shareholder Reality, Social Responsibility or Institutional Necessity? Management, 11(2), 65–79](from https://www.cairn.info/revue-management-2008-2-page-65.htm).
```
```

(er-ethics-open-source-governance-motivation)=
## Motivation and Background

> When setting up open source projects, it is important to pick a structure for organising the community that takes into account ethical considerations 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When setting up open source projects, it is important to pick a structure for organising the community that takes into account ethical considerations.
```

Reviewer: This sentence feels a bit vague. What do we mean by structure here (leadership, organisation legal status etc.)? How do we know what structure takes ethical considerations into account?

> The way that your governance model is designed has a significant impact on the ethics, diversity and inclusion in your project, so critically examining what the implied ethics are of a particular structure is a crucial part of the process of selecting one. 
> It can be difficult to know where to start when considering this aspect of open source projects, so this chapter offers some starting points to consider. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way that your governance model is designed has a significant impact on the ethics, diversity and inclusion in your project, so critically examining what the implied ethics are of a particular structure is a crucial part of the process of selecting one. 
However, it is difficult to know where to start when planning governance structure for your open source projects.
It can be even more challenging when considering if a particular governance model align with ethical framework of your project.
Therefore, we have designed this chapter to offer some starting points to consider. 
```

*This chapter is adapted a speedblog from the Collaborations Workshop 2022, authored by  Yo Yehudi,
Arielle Bennett, Gemma Turon, Declan Bays, Sarah Gibson, Stephan Druskat, Yadira Sanchez, Sophia Batchelor, which is published under a CC-BY license. Read the original article on Software Sustainability Institute's Blog page* 

(er-ethics-open-source-governance-selfreflection)=
## Ethical Governance Starts with Self-Reflection 

The process of interrogating the ethics of a governance model starts with {ref}`er-self-reflection` on the nature and intention of your project. 
Take things right back to first principles and ask yourself (and the project team):
* Why are you doing this project? 
* Who is the project for?
* Who creates and maintains it? 

> * How is the project to be used? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* How will project be used? 
```

> These questions may not always be captured in the initial README, however by scoping the impact and influence of a project before it begins, a team can lay an ethical foundation from the outset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These questions may not always be captured in a general document such as the README page, however by scoping the impact and influence of a project before it begins, a team can lay an ethical foundation from the outset. 
```

For many projects that are community led, this means involving the people that are affected by the project’s outcome in the design, development, and deployment stages.

> True co-creation is an active process of inclusion, and there are many levels of engagement that can be tailored to a projects’ individual needs (see Figure 1. Arnstein's Ladder of Citizen Participation), which a governance model might also need to take into account, for example, how is delegated power dealt with by the project?  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
True co-creation is an active process of inclusion, and there are many levels of engagement that can be tailored to a projects’ individual needs (see the figure - Arnstein's Ladder of Citizen Participation), which a governance model might also need to take into account, for example, how is delegated power dealt with by the project?  
```

Reviewer: Figure numbering in the book is maintained for the entire book, so this may be listed automatically with a number (for example 67 of there are 66 other image before this chapter)

```{figure} ../../figures/ladder-of-participation.jpg
---
name: ladder-of-participation
alt: Colourful graphic of Arnstein's Ladder of Participation (1969) drawn by Juliet Young. A rainbow ladder describes the different types of participation in research - manipulation, educating, informing, consultation, placation, partnership, delegated power and citizen control. 
---

> Arnstein's Ladder of Citizen Participation, illustration credit: [@clinical.creative.psychologist (Juliet Young)](https://twitter.com/juliet_young1/status/1384604477697761281)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arnstein's Ladder of Citizen Participation, illustration credit - [@clinical.creative.psychologist (Juliet Young)](https://twitter.com/juliet_young1/status/1384604477697761281)
```

Reviewer: ':' tend to break the image rendering

It's important that the governance model you select provides robust mechanisms for the level of community participation you are hoping to achieve with your project, with self-reflection being a useful starting point to guide your decision making. 

(er-ethics-open-source-governance-continuous-process)=
## Ethical Governance is a Continuous Process
There are many ways in which your project can (and probably will) change over its lifetime, and some of these changes may be unexpected. 
For example, your software might start being used in domains you have not considered, it might experience a faster growth rate than you have expected, or you may need to decide how to handle an influx of new contributors.

This may also mean that you have to change the way that the project is run, to actively include new parts of the community, deal with a surge in contributions, or face new challenges.
In this scenario, try and reflect the ways in which the governance of your project should evolve to reflect the ethics you commit to.

> For instance, is your governance structure built to allow the whole community to participate and influence a project, that will in turn influence themselves and their work?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, is your governance structure built to allow the whole community to participate and influence a project that will in turn influence themselves and their work?
```

> It may feel like a giant leap to go from, say, a free-form do-ocracy to something more structured, or to give up your position of benevolent dictator, or to introduce different voting rules for the steering committee, but if you want your project to reflect your ethics, you will need to allow your ethics to impact the project, and iterate on this process. 

Reviewer: Add a reference for do-ocracy - or please include it in the glossary that can be cross referenced here.

> It may feel like a giant leap to go from, say, a free-form do-ocracy to something more structured, or to give up your position of benevolent dictator, or to introduce different voting rules for the steering committee, but if you want your project to reflect your ethics, you will need to allow your ethics to impact the project, and iterate on this process. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It may feel like a giant leap to go from, say, a free-form do-ocracy to something more structured, or to give up your position of benevolent dictator, or to introduce different voting rules for the steering committee.
However, if you want your project to reflect your ethics, you will need to allow your ethics to impact the project and iterate on this process. 
```

It is a bit like putting debugging checkpoints in the way you run your project: run, but halt to reflect if you encounter a state that is unethical, based on your definition of ethical. 

In short: `if (ethical == true) { // Do stuff } else { // FIXME }`

(er-ethics-open-source-governance-action)=
## Ethics Need Governance to become Actionable
Open source project communities may already have an implicit set of ethics regarding their project in place. 

> However, unless these ethics are being made explicit, and inform a structured model of governance, they will remain inconsequential or, as Jo Freeman has put it in her essay [“The Tyranny of Structurelessness”](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.jofreeman.com/joreen/tyranny.htm&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1652716021793901&usg=AOvVaw2m6_oS7n1u7IvfHamGJDBs), impotent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, unless these ethics are being made explicit, and inform a structured model of governance, they will remain inconsequential or, as Jo Freeman has put it in her essay {cite}`The Tyranny of Structurelessness<Freeman2012Stuctureless>`, impotent.
```

In order to empower your project to act on your ethics, it will need some governance model to adhere to. 

> There already exist a number of more-or-less established governance models, and you can take a look at the resources section of this chapter for links to more information on them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There already exist a number of more-or-less established governance models and you can take a look at the resources section of this chapter for links to more information on them. 
```

> In order to empower your project to act on your ethics, it will need some governance model to adhere to. 
> There already exist a number of more-or-less established governance models, and you can take a look at the resources section of this chapter for links to more information on them. 
> Keep in mind, though, that not all of them may cater well for an ethical framework, or the specific ethical framework you have in mind, in fact….

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To empower your project to act on your ethics, it will need some governance model to adhere to. 
There already exist a number of more-or-less established governance models, and you can take a look at the resources section of this chapter for links to more information on them. 
Keep in mind, though, that not all of them may cater well for an ethical framework or the specific ethical framework you have in mind.
```

Reviewer: was that an incomplete sentence? (ended with in fact ...)

Author: Ah that's an artefact of the blog post :)

(er-ethics-open-source-governance-technology)=
## Do Not Rely on Technology to do Your Ethics for You

> In an age of automation, of bots, and of exceptional investment into AI, you might be inclined to think “This all sounds like a heavy workload - how do I even get started?” You might consider a couple of options - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In an age of automation, bots, and exceptional investment into AI, you might be inclined to think “This all sounds like a heavy workload - how do I even get started?” You might consider a couple of options - 
```

> In an age of automation, of bots, and of exceptional investment into AI, you might be inclined to think “This all sounds like a heavy workload - how do I even get started?” You might consider a couple of options - 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In an age of automation, of bots, and of exceptional investment into AI, you might be inclined to think “This all sounds like a heavy workload - how do I even get started?”.
You might consider a couple of options - 
```

1. Do I adopt an existing governance model? 
2. Maybe I should get a computer system to do it for me, or at least help me out?

Pulling a governance system out of the box is a great way to get started, but don’t assume that because a governance system has been in use before - perhaps even successfully - that the governance system has all the ethical kinks worked out, or even all the practical challenges. 
For instance, the “benevolent dictator for life” (BDFL) open source governance model has practical as well as ethical issues: what if that BDFL has an unexpected health crisis and disappears? 
How do we ensure that the dictator stays benevolent?

> What if they’re missing viewpoints that were obvious if only the governance committee was more than one person?

Reviewer 2: Possible examples here

- [Linux code of conduct and Linus taking a break](https://itsfoss.com/linux-code-of-conduct/)
- [Richard Stallman using position to restore abortion joke in glibc documentation](https://www.theregister.com/2018/05/09/gnu_glic_abort_stallman/)

> 

Reviewer: In this section it is worth mentioning the origination of BDFL with Guido van Rossum, who ultimately decided that he doesn't want this title in order to transfer the power to the community: https://www.mail-archive.com/python-committers@python.org/msg05628.html. So is BDFL even something that aligns with the overall ethics of open?

I have continued to oppose and challenge the BDFL position and would like to keep that up here :) Happy to draft something to be included here.

Author: I have added a section - thoughts welcome

Relying on technology to be your governance is equally risky.
Technology can be an incredible tool, but so long as it’s the only tool you have making governance decisions, it’s likely to be a potential problem.

> This is why it is important to start the process of governance selections with self-reflection, so that you are prepared 

Reviewer 2: Is this sentence unfinished?

(er-ethics-open-source-governance-summary)=
## Summary

By its nature, open source technology can deliver benefits to all societies. 
However, projects started with all the best of intentions can still evolve into something malicious through poor guidance and oversight. 
Such considerations should therefore be noted and addressed through the application of a formal governing structure throughout any such projects, especially in sensitive areas where conflicts are likely to arise. 

> And while the use of a governance structure doesn’t negate the possibility of bad things from happening, it does however provide a framework which allows us to put such actions into context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the use of a governance structure doesn’t negate the possibility of bad things from happening, it does however provide a framework which allows us to put such actions into context.
```

> This chapter gives some ethical pointers for open source project communities to consider when constructing their own governance models, with the intention of supporting the continual evolution of open source towards a more just and equitable ecosystem for all contributors and users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter, we have provided some ethical pointers for open source project communities to consider when constructing their governance models, to support the continual evolution of open source towards a more just and equitable ecosystem for all contributors and users. 
```
